GWEN IFILL: Good evening.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
®MD-BO /STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE
(D), Mayor
of Baltimore, Maryland: If we
can't figure
out a way to turn that anger and
frustration
into action, we're not going to
get better.
GWEN IFILL: I sit down with the
mayor of Baltimore,
after a blistering federal
review accuses
the Baltimore police of systemic
racial bias.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Wednesday:
Controversy follows Donald
Trump, and new
questions emerge over whether
the Republican
nominee has the temperament and
the character
to be president of the United
States.
GWEN IFILL: And a chilling
account of abuse.
Leaked documents reveal
disturbing conditions
for migrants held off
Australia's coast.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus: What if
your electronic
devices could detect your mood?
Companies are exploring the ways
emotional
recognition technology can help
their users.
RANA EL KALIOUBY, CEO,
Affectiva: I realized
that we were spending so much
time with our
devices and our technology, yet
it had absolutely
no idea how we felt or what our
mental state
was.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The presidential
contest found
Donald Trump trying to move on
again from
something he said a day earlier.
Hillary Clinton, meanwhile,
looked to capitalize
on the furor.
Correspondent Lisa Desjardins
has our report.
LISA DESJARDINS: Amid talk of
campaign resets,
Donald Trump changed scenes
today, trading
his usual large rally for,
first, a small
roundtable of coal executives
and workers
in Southwestern Virginia, and,
later, a speech
on jobs, especially mining jobs.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
The mines will be gone.
The mines will be gone if she
gets elected.
LISA DESJARDINS: That was Trump
on offense.
But he's also on defense over
these words
from yesterday about Hillary
Clinton and gun
rights.
DONALD TRUMP: If she gets to
pick her judges,
nothing you can do, folks,
although the Second
Amendment people, maybe there
is.
I don't know.
LISA DESJARDINS: Trump told FOX
News he meant
political action, not violence.
DONALD TRUMP: Nobody in that
room thought
anything other than what you
just said.
There can be no other
interpretation.
Even reporters have told me.
I mean, give me break.
But the dishonest people -- what
it is, there
is a tremendous power behind the
Second Amendment.
It's a political power.
And there are few things so
powerful, I have
to say, in terms of politics.
LISA DESJARDINS: Others charged
Trump was
indeed inciting violence.
Even House Speaker Paul Ryan,
celebrating
his own primary victory last
night, suggested
the nominee explain.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the
House: I
heard about the Second Amendment
quote.
It sounds like just a joke gone
bad.
I hope he clears it up very
quickly.
You should never joke about
something like
that.
LISA DESJARDINS: Hillary
Clinton, in Des Moines,
Iowa, slammed her opponent.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Words matter, my friends.
Yesterday, we witnessed the
latest in a long
line of casual comments from
Donald Trump
that cross the line.
Every single one of these
incidents shows
us that Donald Trump simply
doesn't have the
temperament to be president and
commander
in chief of the United States.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: This as the
Clinton campaign
unveiled new Republican
endorsements today,
and publicly launched a new
official push
called Together for America to
win over more
Republicans and independents,
all that as
a new Reuters survey shows more
Republican
voters may be up for grabs.
About one-fifth of registered
Republicans
said they want Trump to drop his
presidential
bid entirely.
It's led to a new line from the
Democratic
nominee.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I am
humbled and moved
by the Republicans who are
willing to stand
up and say that Donald Trump
doesn't represent
their values.
LISA DESJARDINS: But she too
faced criticism
over newly released e-mails from
her time
as secretary of state.
They show staffers for the
Clinton Foundation
worked to gain favors and help
for donors
with some of her staff at the
State Department.
Trump blasted his opponent over
the issue.
DONALD TRUMP: It's called
pay-for-play.
And some of these were really,
really bad,
and illegal.
If it's true, it's illegal.
You pay if you're getting
things.
LISA DESJARDINS: With three
months left in
the election, the candidates are
hitting hard
and looking especially to big
states.
Tomorrow, Trump heads south to
Florida; Clinton
goes north to Michigan.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will turn to
the debate
swirling around Trump and his
temperament
later in the program.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: U.S.-backed
fighters in Libya claimed they
have captured
Islamic State headquarters in
the city of
Sirte.
Militias attacked ISIS positions
in June,
but the fighting had been
stalemated for weeks.
They finally broke through with
the help of
U.S. airstrikes that began 10
days ago.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Afghanistan,
the government
is sending more troops to a key
southern province,
in the face of major Taliban
gains.
Insurgent fighters have
surrounded Lashkar
Gah, capital of Helmand
Province, after weeks
of intense fighting.
Newly deployed security forces
arrived on
the outskirts of the city today
to join the
battle.
The Afghan units are getting air
support from
the U.S.
GWEN IFILL: A tragedy overnight
in Baghdad.
Officials say a dozen babies
died in a fire
that engulfed a hospital
maternity ward.
Investigators said initial
indications are
the blaze was sparked by faulty
electrical
wiring.
Bereaved families gathered
outside the hospital
today, appealing for information
and struggling
to come to terms with their
loss.
SHAYMA HUSSEIN, Mother of Victim
through translator):
I looked at the victims.
I saw them charred.
It was a horrible scene.
It was very difficult for me to
give birth
to a child.
I have had medical treatments to
have a baby.
After all these efforts, I
received a charred
body.
GWEN IFILL: Outrage over the
fire is likely
to add to pressure on Iraq's
government to
upgrade deteriorating
facilities.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Brazil's Senate
formally voted
today to put President Dilma
Rousseff on trial.
She was suspended in may for
allegedly violating
budget rules and spending funds
without government
approval.
The trial will begin later this
month, and
if Rousseff is convicted, she
will be expelled
from office.
GWEN IFILL: And at the Summer
Olympics, an
American cyclist won the gold
medal in the
women's time trial in road
racing.
Kristin Armstrong has now won
that event for
the third straight Olympics.
She turns 43 years old tomorrow.
Meanwhile, organizers stepped up
security
after someone pelted a media bus
with rocks
last night.
Two people were hurt.
JUDY WOODRUFF: More headaches
today for Delta
Air Lines passengers, in the
wake of Monday's
computer outage.
More than 300 flights were
canceled and hundreds
more were delayed.
That is on top of some 1,800
scrapped on Monday
and Tuesday.
GWEN IFILL: On Wall Street
today, the Dow
Jones industrial average lost 37
points to
close at 18495.
The Nasdaq fell nearly 21
points, and the
S&P 500 slipped six.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
archaeologists in Bulgaria
have found what is likely the
world's oldest
gold artifact.
The tiny bead measures only
about an eighth
of an inch across, and dates
back to around
4500 B.C.
It was discovered in the
country's south,
at the site of one of Europe's
earliest urban
settlements.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a scathing
review of Baltimore's police
force; Donald
Trump and Hillary Clinton, are
they fit to
lead as president?; creating a
place in the
world for people with autism;
and much more.
GWEN IFILL: A bruising report
released by
the Department of Justice today
spelled out
a long pattern of racial
discrimination by
the Baltimore Police Department.
The investigation was
commissioned in May
2015, after the death of a black
man, Freddie
Gray, in the back of a police
van.
Gray's death sparked city-wide
protests and
thrust Baltimore to the
forefront of a national
reckoning on race and policing.
The report examined police
practices from
2010 to 2015.
The numbers paint an
unmistakable picture
of policing disparities.
Baltimore is 63 percent
African-American,
but blacks were charged with 91
percent of
discretionary offenses, and made
up 82 percent
of traffic stops.
More than 40 percent of all
pedestrian stops
in the city came in the two
small predominantly
African-American districts.
One black man was stopped 30
times.
None resulted in any charges.
The investigation also found
police frequently
used excessive force and
escalated encounters.
Vanita Gupta, who leads the
Civil Rights Division
at the Department of Justice,
announced the
findings today at a press
conference with
Baltimore's mayor and police
commissioner.
VANITA GUPTA, Assistant U.S.
Attorney General:
These violations have deeply
eroded the trust
between BPD and the community it
serves, trust
that is essential to effective
policing, as
well as to officer and public
safety.
The problems in Baltimore didn't
happen overnight
or appear in a day.
The pattern and practice that we
found results
from longstanding systemic
deficiencies in
the BPD.
GWEN IFILL: I spoke with Mayor
Stephanie Rawlings-Blake
at Baltimore City Hall this
afternoon.
Madam Mayor, thank you for
joining us.
The words used to describe this
report have
been astounding, shocking,
amazing.
I don't think I can overstate
it.
And there have been other
reports done.
There have been other
examinations.
Why are we just reaching this
point now?
®MD-BO /STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE
(D), Mayor
of Baltimore, Maryland: I think
woe are reaching
this point because the city has
leadership
that is focused and determined
on making meaningful
reforms.
We have tried to improve the
police department,
the policing strategy, the
relationships with
the police and the community.
In the past under my
administration, when
I saw that we were falling
short, that's when
I asked the Department of
Justice to come
in for a collaborative review to
help us strengthen
our community policing effort.
And when I saw that that was
insufficient,
that's when I asked for the
Department of
Justice to do the patterns and
practice investigation.
What I heard from the Department
of Justice
is that they're clear that these
are longstanding,
systemic issues that predate me
and some that
predate my life that we have had
in Baltimore.
But the difference today is that
there is
leadership in place that's
determined to get
it right, because that's what
the citizens
of Baltimore deserve.
GWEN IFILL: Most people in this
country know
of what happened in Baltimore
because of the
Freddie Gray case.
The Department of Justice says
this is not
just about Freddie Gray, but
would these efforts
have been put into place without
Freddie Gray?
STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE: Well,
I can only
speak to my track record.
And before the tragic death of
Freddie Gray
and the unrest that followed,
these reforms
were under way.
Before the death of Freddie
Gray, I was in
a very lonely fight in
Annapolis, our state
capital, to get reforms, to
fight for reforms
to the Law Enforcement Officers
Bill of Rights,
something many people in the
community felt
was a barrier to the trust
relationships that
they believed were necessary for
progress.
They thought it was a barrier to
holding officers
accountable for wrongdoing.
That happened before.
That fight happened before.
The collaborative review
happened before the
death of Freddie Gray.
GWEN IFILL: Let's step back from
just your
administration, because what
this report shows
is something pretty pervasive
that I'm not
sure that any report could fix.
It's a pervasive attitude not
only on the
parts of police, but also on the
part of the
community.
How does a report or even a
negotiated settlement
or a consent decree get to the
bottom of those
attitudes?
STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE: I
think it is going
to be up to everyone in the
community to say
that we have to come to the
table in a spirit
of collaboration with mutual
respect and roll
up our sleeves and do the hard
work of getting
to better.
We cannot afford to do what I
have seen in
too many parts of the country,
where people
just, you know, retrench to
their corners,
right, and just shout and
they're angry and
they're frustrated.
If we can't figure out a way to
turn that
anger and frustration into
action, we're not
going to get better.
GWEN IFILL: If I am the black
man who's been
stopped 30 times for crossing
the street by
an officer in this police
department, why
should I believe any of that?
STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE: You
should believe
it because there is nothing
about my administration
that is trying to hide him or
any of the problems
that we have from the public.
I am -- I have today and have
always been
about shining a light on our
most pressing
challenges, so that we can be
about the business
of fixing them and of getting,
you know, better
and safer and stronger as a
city.
GWEN IFILL: The police chief,
the police commissioner
said today he's already fired
six police officers
in 2016.
Were they particularly connected
to this?
STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE: No,
it's an effort,
his ongoing efforts to hold
officers accountable
for their actions.
And I'm grateful to have a
police commissioner
who's been through a patterns
and practice
of investigation and consent
decree.
He understands the importance of
holding officers
accountable.
He is side by side with me in
these efforts
to strengthen or to reform the
Law Enforcement
Officers Bill of Rights to give
him more authority
to deal with officers that have
been found
guilty of wrongdoing.
It is a frustration.
GWEN IFILL: Were these specific
firing, did
they have to do with this
ongoing investigation,
or are they separate?
STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE: I
would say separate,
but it is a clear indication
that the work
of reform, the work of better
transparency
and holding officers accountable
is ongoing.
GWEN IFILL: Would you say that
the retrofitting
of police vans that you
mentioned in your
news conference today, which,
obviously, that's
how Freddie Gray died, in the
back of a police
van, would you say that was also
part of this,
or was that something that was
ongoing beforehand?
STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE: There
were some
changes in policy that were
being implemented.
But as far as the retrofitting
and the cameras,
I'm not tone-deaf to what
happened with the
death of Freddie Gray.
We knew that we needed to make
changes with
training, with equipment, with
being able
to hold officers accountable
when it comes
to transportation.
And that's why these changes
were made.
GWEN IFILL: In the end, what you
agreed to
today with the Justice
Department -- and I
want to read it to get it right
-- an agreement
in principle which leads to
framework for
negotiations, which to, once
again someone
in Sandtown-Winchester, the
neighborhood where
so many of these things have
happened, looks
at that and says, what does that
even mean
and how does that have any
effect on me?
STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE: What
it means is
that the Department of Justice
has never had
as detailed a blueprint moving
forward with
a city on how we can be better,
that they
should know that the level of
commitment that
I have, that the police
commissioner has,
that the rank-and-file officers
have to improving
not just the relationship with
the police
and the community, but also the
results for
getting a safer city, there is
no stronger
example of our determination and
our intention
to be better.
There is no stronger example in
the country
than what we're doing here in
Baltimore.
GWEN IFILL: Mayor Stephanie
Rawlings-Blake,
thank you very much.
STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE: Thank
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now back to the
presidential
race, and new questions this
week surrounding
Donald Trump's temperament.
For two views on what exactly
makes a presidential
candidate fit to lead, we are
joined by retired
Air Force General Michael
Hayden.
He's former director of the
Central Intelligence
Agency and of the National
Security Agency.
And Kansas Secretary of State
Kris Kobach,
he served as an aide to former
Attorney General
John Ashcroft in the George W.
Bush administration.
And we welcome both of you to
the "NewsHour."
General Hayden, to you first.
You were one of 50 Republicans
to sign an
open letter this week saying
that Donald Trump
shouldn't be elected president.
You said he would be the most
reckless president
in U.S. history.
What do you base that on?
GEN.
MICHAEL HAYDEN (RET.), Former
CIA Director:
Well, I mean, obviously, that's
a prediction
that is based on our analysis.
He's not yet become president
and he's not
done anything in the Oval
Office.
But we based it upon what we
have seen of
the candidate during the
campaign.
We have based upon the kinds of
things that
he said, the kinds of responses
that he's
had to provocations.
We see a lack of the proper
temperament, character,
patience, civility, knowledge,
and let me
add curiosity.
When we were waiting for a turn
-- and we
understand there is a political
process here.
Some things happen early in a
campaign.
Some things happens later.
We were waiting for an
adjustment, where the
candidate was more serious, more
fact-based,
more concerned about the
specifics of what
he was saying, and it just
didn't happen.
So, we felt we had to point that
out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Temperament,
character, and
so on, Kris Kobach, as someone
who supports
Donald Trump, what do you say to
that?
KRIS KOBACH (R), Kansas
Secretary of State:
I disagree.
And I have had the advantage of
the opportunity
to meet with Mr. Trump on
several occasions.
And my experience is that he's
very intelligent.
He's thirsty for information.
He wants to hear what you have
to say.
He listens to his advisers.
He digests the information very
quickly, and
he's got a good memory, because
I remember
one time I was talking to him
about something,
and then he pulled some
information out of
his memory banks that was a
great connection
that I hadn't even thought to
mention to him.
So, I think there is another
difference here,
too.
Different presidents are
different as far
as their public persona vs.
their persona
meeting with advisers.
For example, George Bush was
pretty much the
same in person as when he was
speaking publicly.
I think Donald Trump has a stage
persona and
he also has a temperament when
meeting with
his advisers.
Now, the positions are the same,
but the attitude
is a little bit different.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me ask
you General
Hayden about that.
What about that?
What if there is a different
Donald Trump
who is more reasoned and more
rational in
private?
GEN.
MICHAEL HAYDEN: So, why isn't he
running?
I mean, that's a little bit like
pay no attention
to the man in front of the
screen, to paraphrase
"The Wizard of Oz."
We have campaigns so that the
electorate can
get to know the candidate and
make an intelligent
choice.
And so if the candidate is
hiding his true
persona, seems to defeat the
whole purpose
of electoral campaigns.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about that,
Kris Kobach?
KRIS KOBACH: In the course of a
-- speaking
at a public event, you are not
going to suddenly
change course or then show a
lack of confidence,
whereas, in person, he may say,
OK, well,
tell me more.
I need to know more about this.
And so that's the point I'm
making.
The public is getting to see who
Donald Trump
is.
My point is that the allegation
General Hayden
had made was that he doesn't
listen to people.
And I don't know how he can make
that allegation
unless he's seen the person in a
room and
been talking with him and
providing information.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you do say,
General Hayden,
in the letter that your sense of
Donald Trump
is that he doesn't listen.
You say that he met with Henry
Kissinger,
he met with James Baker.
GEN.
MICHAEL HAYDEN: Jim Baker,
right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Didn't seem to
change his views.
GEN.
MICHAEL HAYDEN: And came out,
and asked, did
talking to those very
prestigious members
of the American national
security community,
above party, actually, said, did
they change
your views on anything?
No.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kris Kobach, let
me come back
to Donald Trump's comments
yesterday in North
Carolina about Hillary Clinton,
about the
Second Amendment, suggesting
that -- quote
-- "Second Amendment people"
might put a stop
to Hillary Clinton naming
certain judges.
We now learned today that the
Secret Service
is having conversations with Mr.
Trump's campaign
about that comment.
How did you read what he said?
How do you explain it?
KRIS KOBACH: Oh, I think it was
pretty clear,
if you look at the video.
The audience is interacting with
him while
he's giving a speech.
And he says, look, it's too bad.
If Hillary gets the ninth
nominee on the Supreme
Court, they're going to take
away your Second
Amendment rights.
And then he says, well, the
Second Amendment
people might be able to do
something about
it, in so many words.
What I read that is, even if the
Supreme Court
rules, Congress still has the
pass a law confiscating
weapons or banning certain
firearms.
And Second Amendment people are
the NRA, the
Gun Owners of America, all these
organizations
that have incredible influence
on Capitol
Hill.
I think that's exactly what he
meant.
And I don't see a person why a
person would
read into that some sort of
threat of violence
or assassination, as the Hillary
Clinton campaign
hyperventilated.
I just don't think that's even
plausible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we know,
General Hayden,
even some people in the audience
took to it
mean -- may have been a joke,
but that he
was referring to...
(CROSSTALK)
GEN.
MICHAEL HAYDEN: Well, let me --
I don't.
I watched it, and I believe what
he said was
what he said.
But let me just for the moment
accept Kris'
approach to this.
It shows a certain lack of
understanding of
American political history,
American political
culture, that even if he
actually meant to
say this, that he chose to say
it like this,
given our darkest history in
terms of political
assassination, in what universe
does someone
want to be president of the
United States
and think that that's an OK
formulation?
I can go further because it's
part of a pattern.
In what universe does someone
who might actually
become the president of the
United States
say, nah, you know, we may not
-- we may not
live up to our NATO commitments,
an attack
against one -- or an attack is
an attack against
all, unless everyone has paid
their bills?
I mean, in what universe does
someone who
is actually going to be the
president of the
United States think it's OK to
say, they hate
us, they all hate us, Islam
hates us?
You don't have to become
president for those
statements to actually harm
American national
security.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kris Kobach?
KRIS KOBACH: I don't think those
statements
are exactly as the general has
characterized
them.
He doesn't say all of Islam
hates us.
He has said that we have to vet
people coming
in from places in the world
where Islamic
radical terrorism is prevalent
and put a temporary
halt on some of those entries
from those parts
of the world.
I mean, look, he often will
express something
in a general principle or
general idea, and
then usually he will come back
and give some
specifics.
I would like to turn, though, to
presidential
temperament again.
Another factor is independence.
Right?
You want the president to be
uninfluenced
by any factors other than his
advisers and
the best interests of the United
States.
I think, on that category,
Donald Trump easily
beats Hillary Clinton.
We have the example of the
Clinton Foundation.
At the very time that the
Algerian government
was having multiple meetings
with the Clinton
State Department, she was
receive -- the foundation
was receiving half-a-million
from the Algerians.
At the very time that a Russian
uranium executive
transferred $2.35 million to the
foundation,
she then OKs a deal where the
Russians gain
control of 20 percent of U.S.
uranium interests.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me put
that...
KRIS KOBACH: That's a big issue,
too.
And I think people will wonder,
as long as
the Clinton Foundation exists,
has there been
a recent contribution and is she
going to
look at that before she makes a
decision?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me put that
question to
General Hayden.
GEN.
MICHAEL HAYDEN: Sure.
Look, I agree with Kris that you
don't want
a president who is subject to
external influence,
external being outside of the
United States,
outside the proper course of our
political
process.
I get that.
And I'm not carrying any brief
here for Secretary
Clinton.
But what -- I'm just simply
pointing out that
if you look at the series of
things that the
candidate has allowed himself to
say, if he
governs in any way consistent
with those statements,
I think we have grounds to be
afraid, very
afraid.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you mean that
literally?
GEN.
MICHAEL HAYDEN: One of the
things that prompted
the letter was the seeming tenor
of the campaign
and of the candidate, frankly,
to think that
the world's an ugly place right
now simply
because his predecessors were
stupid or weak
or corrupt.
The world is an ugly place
because the world
is very complicated place, and
there doesn't
seem to be any appreciation for
the complexity
of the problems that he's going
to have to
face as president.
And if he goes in there with a
simplistic
understanding and simplistic
answers, it's
going to make the world worse.
And, again, that is no brief for
his predecessor,
whom I have criticized more
often than not.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Kobach, final
last word.
KRIS KOBACH: I certainly agree
with the general
comment that Mr. Trump has made
that the world
is a dangerous place.
And it's a more dangerous place
than it was
seven years ago.
And you also have to think about
the president's
position with respect to our
enemies.
And I think there, too, you have
a better
person, a better chief executive
in Mr. Trump,
because no one doubts that he's
willing to
walk away from a deal if it's a
bad one.
No one doubts that he's willing
to punish
our enemies if they transgress
U.S. interests,
whereas, with Hillary, she is
very predictable.
And you don't expect anything
different than
really than we saw under the
Obama administration.
So I think that in terms of the
American interests,
I would feel more safe with a
President Trump
representing those interests to
the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kansas Secretary
of State Kris
Kobach, retired Air Force
General Michael
Hayden, we thank you both.
GEN.
MICHAEL HAYDEN: Thanks.
Thanks, Kris.
KRIS KOBACH: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
appalling conditions
in refugee camps off Australia's
coast; computers
that can read human emotions;
and one country's
soldiers use an unusual
technique to unwind.
But, first, we continue our
series A Place
in the World.
Last night, we reported on a
group of young
men with autism who have moved
out of their
childhood homes, in a first step
toward living
independently, all except the
man on the lower
right, whose level of disability
makes the
prospect of a rewarding
adulthood much too
complicated to achieve.
John Donvan part two of our
report.
JOHN DONVAN, Co-Author, "In a
Different Key:
The Story of Autism": His name
is Matt Resnik
and, without knowing it, he has
helped changed
the face of autism in his
hometown Phoenix,
Arizona, and not just because he
produces
of a line of baked goods, SMILE
Biscotti,
which are for sale all over the
city, even
here at Peet's Coffee at Phoenix
International
Airport.
Matt is literally the face of
SMILE Biscotti,
where the ads quite deliberately
mention that
he has autism.
MAN: Let's go, Matt.
Let's go deliver.
JOHN DONVAN: Indeed, he does.
Go back a few minutes earlier to
when we first
started taping his delivery of
biscotti, and
his autistic nature is more than
evident.
ROB RESNIK, Father of Matt
Resnik: All right,
Matt, stop.
We're not going to look at the
camera.
Look straight ahead.
Matt, look where we're going.
Come on.
Look at me.
Look at dad.
All right, no more pictures.
Come. on.
JOHN DONVAN: That's his dad with
him, Rob
Resnik.
And the reason we didn't
formally interview
Matt himself is that he cannot
do a television
interview.
How are you today?
ROB RESNIK: How you are?
MATT RESNIK, SMILE Biscotti: I
am magnificent.
MATT RESNIK: Good.
Good.
JOHN DONVAN: He lacks the
language skills
for that, which is a key reason
you don't
see many stories about people
like him in
the media.
Moreover, without his dad
guiding him, Matt
would get lost here in hurry.
It's why he's still lives at
home, a grown
man, with parents who are no
longer young,
and a mother who represents his
closest connection
to anyone.
You can see that so easily,
what's between
them.
But there's another side to this
connection.
It's knowing that it may never
be duplicated,
and that no one else may have
Matt's back
like this.
DENISE RESNIK, Mother of Matt
Resnik: I do
worry about Matt.
I worry because he is so
trusting and so vulnerable.
I worry about, who is going to
be in his home
or help him and who is going to
understand
him and all his idiosyncrasies?
And will I be there?
Let's sit over here.
JOHN DONVAN: And how Denise has
responded
to that worry, one that is
shared by all parents
of all children facing such
challenges, it's
left its mark, and not just in
her house,
but in a much bigger way.
Although changing the world was
the farthest
thing from her mind back when
Matt was first
diagnosed with autism in the
early 1990s.
Then, the mission looked like
this.
DENISE RESNIK: He was going to
be one of those
kids who recovered from his
autism.
I was sure of it.
I was going to make sure that
that happened.
JOHN DONVAN: And here's what
that meant.
DENISE RESNIK: Immediately after
Matt's diagnosis,
I poured my heart and soul and
every waking
hour into making sure that we
were going to
provide Matt 40 hours of
one-on-one therapy
every week, then artfully
integrate speech
therapy and art therapy and
riding therapy.
JOHN DONVAN: Denise also
followed the path
taken by many other parents
before her, in
other times and places, helping
to launch
an organization, the Southwest
Autism Research
and Resource Center, SARRC for
short.
DENISE RESNIK: This is our
classroom play
area, and this is where a lot of
learning
takes place.
JOHN DONVAN: Which would bring
about, she
hoped, the rescue she was
praying for.
That essentially was the mission
back then.
DENISE RESNIK: We do our
research right here.
JOHN DONVAN: SARRC even launched
its own scientific
research center and studied and
developed
autism-specific curricula.
It was an all-out campaign that
lasted years.
The only thing was, Matt did not
recover from
autism.
The available therapies can lead
to dramatically
different results in different
people.
And in Matt's case, he did make
strides.
He learned to bike and to hike
and to read
some words and multiply numbers
in his head,
which came in handy when he
helped his mom
bake.
But some things got worse, like
his eating
habits, chewing on things that
were not food.
DENISE RESNIK: He would eat
things that were
not edible.
In a year, he chewed through 132
shirts.
JOHN DONVAN: Nor did Matt ever
learn to recognize
danger in the usual sense.
Even now, he wouldn't know what
to do if,
say, something in the oven
caught fire.
And his language still has
serious limits.
He has never in his life asked a
question
or put together a spoken
sentence of his own
making.
He never could talk the way he
could sing,
even back then, when Denise was
still counting
on this little kid outgrowing
the challenges
to his having a place of his own
in the world
out there.
And over time, Denise came to
the realization
that it was the world out there
that would
have to change if Matt was to be
safe and
supported when his mom and dad
were gone.
Accepting that reality, in time,
Denise shifted
SARRC's mission in a new
direction.
DENISE RESNIK: For the last two
decades, I
have poured my heart and soul
into trying
to build a community with a lot
of other people,
in trying to achieve a vision.
JOHN DONVAN: And when you say
community, you
don't just mean a community of
the people
directly affected by autism.
DENISE RESNIK: Oh, I mean a
broader community.
JOHN DONVAN: Everybody.
DENISE RESNIK: Right.
JOHN DONVAN: And it's why
Phoenix, Arizona,
SARRC's hometown, may be the
most autism-aware,
autism-friendly metropolis in
the world, one
in which everywhere Denise
pointed when we
rode the light rail through
downtown together,
there was a business employing
autistic people.
DENISE RESNIK: And this is CVS
pharmacy.
JOHN DONVAN: Or a school with
classes designed
with autism in mind.
DENISE RESNIK: You can see ASU.
JOHN DONVAN: Or research centers
investigating
treatments.
DENISE RESNIK: St. Joseph
Hospital and Medical
Center.
JOHN DONVAN: SARRC now has
literally dozens
and dozens of private and public
partners
energized about supporting
autism in real
ways, and not just with money,
but with jobs,
access and housing, some of it
captured in
the story we told last night
about that pilot
program preparing autistic
adults to live
on their own and hold jobs, and
also this
preschool, which mixes classes
of autistic
with non-autistic children,
because -- and
it's with that mission in mind
again -- consider
what happens when all these kids
grow up.
DANIEL OPENDEN, President,
Southwest Autism
Research & Resource Center: They
are inclusive
of kids that are different or
that have autism
or that have disabilities out on
the playground.
They're future employers.
They're future co-workers.
So, we're not having to teach
these kids directly.
They're just consumed around
people who are
different from them.
JOHN DONVAN: And that is the big
picture that
Denise has long had in mind, a
world where
support doesn't merely mean paid
staff providing
services.
It means, well, having neighbors
who care,
having friends.
DENISE RESNIK: What people like
Matt and others
need, and what we need, are
communities, communities
that include friends, people to
support us,
health care, jobs, recreation,
places of worship,
transportation.
And to think that a family can
go at this
alone to build a life for their
loved one
isn't good enough.
JOHN DONVAN: So, even if a
family had all
the money in the world, that --
having those
resources would not be enough to
take care
of their kid through adulthood
and through
life?
DENISE RESNIK: It would be
enough to take
care of their kid, but what they
may be lacking
are friends, because you don't
pay your friends.
JOHN DONVAN: The next major
step, well, it's
an empty lot right now, but it
won't always
be.
So, when you come out here, do
you -- it is
an empty field now, but do --
can you see
it?
DENISE RESNIK: I can see it.
JOHN DONVAN: Yes?
I can feel it.
And it is going to happen.
And it's something I have been
dreaming about
almost since the first day the
school bus
arrived for Matt.
JOHN DONVAN: This is the future
site of an
apartment complex to be called
First Place,
which will look like this, and
will be supported
by a collaboration among than 75
charitable,
private and public groups,
creating a neighborhood
of people of varying levels of
ability and
disability with more or less
support as needed.
It is where Matt will live too.
DENISE RESNIK: This is going to
be his home.
It may not be his home forever,
but aptly
named, it's going to be his home
when he leaves
our family home.
JOHN DONVAN: His first place
away from home.
DENISE RESNIK: It is.
JOHN DONVAN: Ground-breaking is
set for later
this year.
For now, though, Matt still has
the two best
support people anyone could ask
for, his mom
and dad, who are helping keep
the biscotti
business on track, one that
employs several
people on the autism spectrum.
But when it's just the three of
them together,
that's when the question of
Matt's future
comes back into focus, with the
hope that
10, 20, 30, 40 years from now,
he will have
a whole community by his side
and at his back,
taking in the song, and caring
what he has
to say.
MATT RESNIK (singing): And I'm
free, free-falling.
JOHN DONVAN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm John
Donvan in Phoenix.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We have reported
at length
for more than a year on the
migrant crisis
JUDY WOODRUFF: We have reported
at length
for more than a year on the
migrant crisis
in Europe, the Middle East and
North Africa.
But, tonight, we look at the
plight of those
searching for new homes and
lives far away
from those shores.
Hari Sreenivasan has that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The government
of Australia
has, for years now, made it very
clear that
they will no longer accept
refugees and migrants
coming to the continent by boat.
And those that do are sent to a
tiny island
nation called Nauru off
Australia's northeast
coast.
But recent reports by human
rights advocates,
and today from The Guardian
newspaper, show
nightmarish conditions for more
than 1,000
people who were sent for
processing by Australia's
government to this island
nation.
Allegations in the report
include physical
and sexual abuse, often aimed at
children,
and substandard and inhumane
living conditions.
For more on this, I'm joined
from Paris by
Anna Neistat of Amnesty
International.
Thanks for being with us.
This is a hard place to get to.
You gained access where many
journalists have
not been able to.
Tell us what you saw when you
got to this
island.
ANNA NEISTAT, Amnesty
International: What
I saw there can only be
described as deliberate
systematic abuse.
We're not talking about
individual incidents.
And the files released today
make it crystal-clear.
We are talking about patterns,
patterns of
really serious physical
conditions, heart
diseases, complications from
diabetes, kidney
diseases that are not being
treated properly,
and for which people are not
being transferred
elsewhere to get proper care.
And probably the most
nightmarish of it all
is the state of psychological
trauma and the
rate of self-harm and attempted
suicides amongst
adults, but even worse among
children.
I personally interviewed several
children,
including a boy as young as 9,
who already
attempted suicide and was still
talking about
ending his life.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What's behind
this acute
issues with the children?
Why are they affected in this
way?
ANNA NEISTAT: Well, I think
children are affected
along with adults.
Children, of course, are always
some of the
most vulnerable, but they're
also easy targets.
What they see around them when
their parents
are trying to kill themselves in
front of
their eyes, that also has
enormous effect
on their psychological
well-being.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tell me a
little bit about,
what's the relationship between
Australia
and this tiny island nation?
It's like 3,000 kilometers away.
ANNA NEISTAT: Well, the
relationship is pretty,
pretty simple.
At some point, when Australia
decided that
they are not going to accept
refugees who
are arriving by boat, ostensibly
in order
to prevent people from dying at
sea and to
combat smuggling, they set up
this offshore
processing.
So Australia is now paying
hundreds of millions
of dollars per year for this
operation.
Obviously, it's a significant
part of Nauru's
economy.
The island doesn't really have
much else.
And, in exchange, obviously,
Nauru gets some
employment opportunities, some
investment
in its infrastructure.
And many people of the people --
so many of
the people employed by the
companies who work
on Nauru are local.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This is part
of Australia's
policy to not allow any of these
migrants
or refugees to settle on
Australian soil.
They're keeping them off the
continent for
a reason.
They say that this is to create
a disincentive,
so more refugees don't get on
boats and you
don't see what's been happening
between the
Middle East and Europe.
ANNA NEISTAT: Well, yes, and I
think that's
one of the most cynical refugee
policies I
have ever seen.
And Australia is indeed quite
open about that.
They are essentially making an
example of
these people, so that the ones
-- the ones
that are held in Nauru, so that
others do
not attempt the same route, do
not arrive
to arrive to Australia by boat.
And I think this is not only
unlawful, but
it also again goes against any
principles
of humanity.
What they have spent enormous
effort on is
keeping this whole situation
secret.
Right?
That's why many of your viewers,
I'm sure,
have never heard about this
situation, is
because they kept it completely
secret.
They do not allow independent
journalists
or almost any journalist in, for
that matter.
They do not allow any
international observers,
international organizations.
But what's more, they
essentially swear everybody
who works on the island into
secrecy.
But now this veil of secrecy is
off.
And now that it's off, I really
think it's
high time for Australia to stop
denying -- denying
the undeniable and really start
closing down
this whole operation both in
Manus and in
Nauru and resettling people
either in Australia
or in an appropriate third
country.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We reached out
to the Australian
government for response, and
they say that
they are investigating the
revelations today.
Anna Neistat of Amnesty
International, thank
you.
GWEN IFILL: Now: developing
technology that
can better identify your own
emotions.
At a time when people are
concerned about
what data can track and how it
can be sold,
it is an advance that clearly
raises concerns.
But it may also yield some
important benefits.
The "NewsHour"'s April Brown
takes a look,
part of our weekly series on the
Leading Edge
of science and technology.
DAN MCDUFF, Director of
Research, Affectiva:
You can control the movements of
BB-8, the
little droid, based on how your
facial expressions
are changing.
APRIL BROWN: If this little
droid looks familiar,
you may have seen him in the
most recent Star
Wars film.
BB-8 moved on his own on the
fictional planet
Jakku, but here in Boston, Dan
McDuff is in
charge.
DAN MCDUFF: It's going to detect
my face,
and then start to be able to
control the robot
by making different facial
expressions.
APRIL BROWN: He's taken off.
He's not pleased with you.
The software that allows him to
control BB-8
is called Affdex, and McDuff is
the director
of research for Affectiva, the
company that
created it.
But Affdex can do much more than
make robots
move by making faces.
It can also detect expressions
to help determine
how people are feeling.
DAN MCDUFF: So, we're using the
camera feed
to detect where your face is,
track the feature
points, and identify texture
changes on your
skin.
And when you furrow your brow or
smile, there
are these distinctive patterns
that the computer
can recognize.
And it's actually been trained
on hundreds
of thousands of people, so it's
seen examples
of smiles and brow furrows and
frowns from
many different people.
RANA EL KALIOUBY, CEO,
Affectiva: So, so far,
we have collected over 50
billion emotion
data points.
APRIL BROWN: Rana El Kaliouby is
Affectiva's
CEO, and the brain behind the
artificial intelligence
software.
RANA EL KALIOUBY: I realized
that we were
spending so much time with our
devices and
our technology, yet it had
absolutely no idea
how we felt or what our mental
state was.
APRIL BROWN: How do you know
that this is
accurate?
RANA EL KALIOUBY: Validation is
a -- we take
that very seriously at
Affectiva.
We have a team of labelers based
in Cairo,
and they are certified facial
action coders.
And so we compare the accuracy
of our machine-learning
algorithms to the accuracy of
these human
experts.
On some of these emotional
states, we're approaching
expert human accuracy very, very
fast.
APRIL BROWN: Which ones?
RANA EL KALIOUBY: So for
example, with the
smiles, with the eyebrow furrows
and the eyebrow
raises, it's extremely accurate.
It gets a little trickier when
you look at,
you know, lip puckers or lip
purses or, you
know, squints.
Emotional intelligence is
completely missing
from our digital world, and so
now there is
a lot more understanding of why
emotions are
important and there -- you know,
there is
a lot more understanding of how
this type
of technology can disrupt and
transform a
lot of industries.
APRIL BROWN: The media and
advertising industries
quickly saw the value.
RANA EL KALIOUBY: We have
partnered with 1,400
brands.
We test ads in 75 countries
around the world.
You want to know if people are
resonating
with your ad before it goes live
and before
you spend millions and millions
of dollars.
With our software, you can get a
moment-by-moment
readout of a viewer's emotional
journey.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
The nature of our military has
changed.
APRIL BROWN: Like Affectiva
itself did with
a test to find out how well the
candidates
were connecting with viewers in
one of the
debates for the 2012
presidential election.
Many other companies have found
their own
applications for the emotional
recognition
technology.
ERIN REYNOLDS, CEO, Flying
Mollusk: We call
Nevermind a biofeedback enhanced
adventure
thriller game.
Say that five times fast.
APRIL BROWN: Erin Reynolds is
CEO of Flying
Mollusk, a company that created
the video
game Nevermind.
ERIN REYNOLDS: Nevermind is a
very creepy
game, a very dark, surreal game.
Often, the player will be a
little stressed,
a little scared, a little
anxious when they
are playing it.
So you as a player have to learn
how to stay
calm under the pressure.
The more scared or stressed you
get, the faster
it goes, so it becomes a lot
harder to grab
the hand.
APRIL BROWN: While Nevermind's
purpose is
entertainment-only right now,
Reynolds hopes
the game may eventually help
people with post-traumatic
stress disorder or anxiety.
But the Affdex software is
already being used
in the medical field to try and
improve lives.
NED SAHIN, CEO, Brain Power:
What do you see
on screen?
MATTHEW KRIEGER, 8 Years Old:
Mom.
APRIL BROWN: Eight-year-old
Matthew Krieger
has been diagnosed with autism.
LAURA KRIEGER, Mother of Matthew
Krieger:
A lot of the trouble he gets
into with other
kids is, he thinks he's funny
and doesn't
read at all that he is not or
that there are
annoyed or angry.
APRIL BROWN: Matthew's mother,
Laura, signed
him up for a clinical trial
being conducted
by Ned Sahin.
NED SAHIN: I want to know what's
going on
inside the brain of someone with
autism.
And it turns out parents want to
know that,
too.
You get points for looking for a
while, and
then even for looking away and
then looking
back.
APRIL BROWN: Sahin's company,
Brain Power,
uses Affectiva's software
programs Matthew
sees through Google Glass.
These games are trying to help
him understand
how facial expressions
correspond to emotions
and learn social cues.
NED SAHIN: One of the key life
skills is understanding
the emotions of others.
And another is looking in their
direction
when they are speaking.
Looking at your mom, and while
it's green,
you're getting points.
When it starts to get orange and
red, you're
-- you slow down with the
points.
MATTHEW KRIEGER: Am I looking at
you?
LAURA KRIEGER: You are looking
at me.
Are you looking at me?
Do you think you are?
MATTHEW KRIEGER: Yes.
LAURA KRIEGER: Yes.
MATTHEW KRIEGER: Well, I don't
know if I am.
LAURA KRIEGER: You don't know?
MATTHEW KRIEGER: Because I found
out that,
if I look this way, it doesn't
count.
But if I look through -- if I
look at the
screen at you, I can still see
your eyes,
and it gives me points.
LAURA KRIEGER: So -- but if you
tilt your
head up and look under the
screen, you feel
like you are looking at me?
MATTHEW KRIEGER: Well, I feel
like I am both.
APRIL BROWN: Just a few minutes
later, the
difference in Matthew's gaze
overwhelmed his
mother.
LAURA KRIEGER: I'm going to cry.
MATTHEW KRIEGER: Why?
LAURA KRIEGER: When you look at
me, it makes
me think you haven't really
before, because
you're looking at me
differently.
NED SAHIN: The brain learns very
well by feedback.
We don't know for sure yet, but
we're going
to find out if the kind of
feedback we are
giving can help people teach
themselves these
skills.
APRIL BROWN: After the testing,
Laura Krieger
reflected on what happened.
LAURA KRIEGER: It's such a
difference.
And I have heard him even tell
the psychologist
when she works on eye contact,
he says: "Well,
I have a trick.
I look at your forehead."
And that's probably what people
see in passing,
is that counts for them as eye
contact.
And it did for me.
But this was really different.
Like, this was looking at me.
APRIL BROWN: Allowing a computer
to capture
and read your emotions for
research is one
thing, but Affectiva's Rana El
Kaliouby says
her company is concerned about
how this sensitive
material is used in all
applications.
RANA EL KALIOUBY: We recognize
that your emotional
information is extremely
personal.
And so we have veered away from
all use cases
where that data is being
collected without
your consent.
APRIL BROWN: Is there not a
slippery slope?
If you are giving the computer
the ability
to recognize your emotions, is
that not one
step further towards something
that could
potentially do something
dangerous?
RANA EL KALIOUBY: I think these
conversations
are very important.
I personally believe we are a
long way away
from that scenario.
APRIL BROWN: Still, El Kaliouby
sees her artificial
intelligence work becoming
ubiquitous in the
years to come.
RANA EL KALIOUBY: Fast-forward
three to five
years.
We think our devices and our
technologies
will all have an emotion chip,
so pretty much
like our devices have a GPS or
location-enabled
apps today.
Apparently, we check our phones
on an average
15 times an hour, and so you can
imagine that
being an emotion data point
check-in.
And you can track a person's
mood.
APRIL BROWN: And eventually, she
hopes, it
will help our devices convey
more emotion
than we can with the current
technology.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
April Brown in
Boston.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
to our "NewsHour"
shares, something that caught
our eye that
might be of interest to you,
too.
Maintaining a good work-life
balance is important
to many people.
But in South Korea, one group of
soldiers
has found an unexpected way to
unwind from
the daily grind.
The "NewsHour"'s Julia Griffin
reports.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Once a week,
these soldiers
in the South Korean army's 25th
Division trade
their military boots for a pair
of ballet
slippers.
The plies, tendus and other
exercises are
aimed at relieving stress, as
these troops
are among those guarding the
demilitarized
zone along the border with North
Korea.
KIM JOO-HYEOK, South Korean
Soldier (through
translator): There's a lot of
tension here,
since we live in the unit on the
front line.
it makes me feel insecure at
times.
However, through ballet, I am
able to stay
calm and find balance.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Each session is
taught by Lee
Hyang-Jo, a ballerina with the
Korean National
Ballet.
LEE HYANG-JO, Korean National
Ballet (through
translator): Living as a soldier
is quite
tough, so I wasn't sure I could
actually help
them here.
But now I feel worthwhile
whenever I see them
smiling more and enjoying ballet
as they learn
it little by little.
JULIA GRIFFIN: And unit leaders
have found
the classes provide health
benefits beyond
stress relief.
HEO TAE-SUN, South Korean
Commander (through
translator): Ballet requires a
great amount
of physical strength, is very
good for strengthening
muscle, increasing flexibility,
and correcting
posture.
So I think that ballet has
helped us.
JULIA GRIFFIN: All the training
appears to
be paying off.
The 15 soldiers plan to stage
their own ballet
performance at the end of the
year.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Julia Griffin.
GWEN IFILL: Ballet, that's the
stress relief
I was looking for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sure.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: High-performance athletic
gear can giving
Olympic athletes a winning edge.
This year, innovative gear has
been designed
to protect their health, too.
Learn about four high-tech
uniforms making
a splash in Rio.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Later tonight on
"Charlie Rose":
Meryl Streep and Hugh Grant on
their new film,
"Florence Foster Jenkins."
And before we go, I want to take
a moment
to congratulate my friend and
colleagues Gwen
on receiving the 2016 John
Chancellor Award
for Excellence in Journalism
from Columbia
University.
It is a huge tribute to you, and
we look forward
to that ceremony coming up in
November.
GWEN IFILL: Thank you, Judy.
Thank you so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that is the
"NewsHour"
for tonight.
On Thursday, we will take a
closer look at
the economic plans of Donald
Trump and Hillary
Clinton.
How they might affect your
pocketbook?
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.